h1. Contents

* "Introduction":#intro
* "Serve Unstructured Data":#serve
* "Consume Unstructured Data":#consume
* "Recap":#recap

h1. Introduction

This tutorial demonstrates how to serve unstructured binary data such as "blob":https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_large_object in a Rest.li server. We'll define a Rest.li resource that responds with _fortune reports_ (in PDF format) for GET requests and show you how to consume the GET response from a HTTP client.

_This tutorial assumes that you already have a working Rest.li server. Otherwise, please follow the "Rest.li Quickstart":https://github.com/linkedin/rest.li/wiki/Quickstart:-A-Tutorial-Introduction-to-Rest.li before you continue._

h1. Serve Unstructured Data

We start by defining a *resource* class on the server side by extending the provided @CollectionUnstructuredDataResourceTemplate@ with the generic type of our resource key as @String@. Notice that, different from a regular Rest.li resource interface/template that also requires a _value_ type, an unstructured data resource doesn't require one. Next, we annotate the resource with @@RestLiCollection@ and specify the required resource name and namespace.

```java
@RestLiCollection(name = "fortuneReports", namespace = "com.example.fortune")
public class FortuneReportsResource extends CollectionUnstructuredDataResourceTemplate<String>
{
  @Override
  public void get(String key, @UnstructuredDataWriterParam UnstructuredDataWriter writer)
  {
    byte[] fortuneReportPDF = fortuneReportDB.get(key);  // Fetch the data from source
    writer.setContentType("application/pdf");            // Set the proper MIME content-type
    writer.getOutputStream().write(fortuneReportPDF);    // Output the data into response
  }
}
```

We then implement the GET method simply by overriding from the template class. We obtain the requested fortune report PDF from source (in bytes) and use the @UnstructuredDataWriter@ instance given by the method parameter to return the response. 

@UnstructuredDataWriter@ provides a setter for the required Content-Type header and an @OutputStream@ instance for writing the binary data that goes into the response content. The final response will then be sent to the client after the GET method is successfully returned. 

h1. Consume Unstructured Data

The response wire format contains the Content-Type header and content payload *exactly* as they were specified in the GET method _without any alterations from Rest.li framework_. That means the response can be consumed directly by any http client with no special client-side handling required.

_Example: Using the GET endpoint in a HTML anchor_
```html
<a src="d2://fortuneReports/1">
```

When the link is clicked, the browser receive the PDF response and render the PDF inline or as file-download depends on the resource implementation.

_Example: Calling a local deployed GET endpoint with *curl*_
```bash
$ curl -v http://localhost:1338/fortuneReports/1
...
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/pdf
Content-Length: 5
Content: <<< binary data of the PDF report >>>
```

_Currently, Rest.li client doesn't have support for unstructured data resource. Request builders aren't generated for unstructured data resources._

h1. Recap

As you can see, serving unstructured data in Rest.li is very easy. Defining a resource for unstructured data is similar to how you define a regular Rest.li resource for Records, except that, instead of returning records, you respond with writing the data to an @OutputStream@.

You can learn more about unstructured data support in "Rest.li User Guide":/linkedin/rest.li/wiki/Rest.li-User-Guide#unstructured-data-support.